\section{Introduction}

Serendipity is centred on re-evaluation.  For example, a failed
attempt to develop an ultra-strong superglue resulted in a
re-stickable adhesive that no one was quite sure how to use.  After
considerable trial and error, this turned out to be just the right
ingredient for making the now ubiquitous Post-it\texttrademark\ notes.
%
% In this way, serendipity is related to deviations from expected or
% familiar patterns, and to new insight.
%
When we consider the practical uses for weak glue, the possibility
that a life-saving antibiotic might be found growing on contaminated
petri dishes, or the idea that burdock burrs could be anything but
annoying, we encounter radical changes in the evaluation of what's
interesting.  Importantly, serendipity is not the same as luck. 

The notion of serendipity is increasingly seen as relevant in the arts
\cite{mckay-serendipity}, in the tech industry \cite{rao2015breaking},
and elsewhere.  In the workplace, people have sought to encourage
serendipity with methods drawn from architecture, data science, and
cultural engineering
\cite{kakko2009homo,engineering-serendipity,who-moved-cube}.
Continued development of an interdisciplinary perspective on the
phenomenon of serendipity promises further illumination.  This paper
reassesses and updates an earlier discussion of serendipity in a
computational context.  \cite{pease2013discussion}.  Beginning with a
survey of the historical definitions, perceptions, and examples of
serendipity in order to surfaces its several facets and features, we
then develop a process-based model of serendipity that can
be applied to system design and evaluation.

\citeA{van1994anatomy} -- echoing the
(negative) reflections on the potential
for a purely computational approach to mathematics from \citeA{poincare1910creation} -- claimed that:
\begin{quote}
``\emph{Like all intuitive operating, pure serendipity is not amenable
    to generation by a computer.  The very moment I can plan or
    programme `serendipity' it cannot be called serendipity
    anymore}.'' \citep{van1994anatomy}
\end{quote}
We believe that serendipity is not so mystical as such statements
might seem to imply.  In Section \ref{sec:discussion} we will
show that ``patterns of serendipity'' like those collected by van Andel
can be applied in the design of computational systems.

If serendipity was ruled out as a matter of principle, computing would
be restricted to happy or unhappy \emph{unsurprises} -- preprogrammed,
preunderstood occurrences -- interspersed periodically, perhaps, with
an \emph{unhappy} surprise.  Venkatesh Rao
\citeyearpar{rao2015breaking} uses the term \emph{zemblanity} -- after
William Boyd \citeyearpar{boyd2010armadillo}: ``zemblanity, the
opposite of serendipity, the faculty of making unhappy, unlucky and
expected discoveries by design'' -- to describe systems that are
doomed to produce only unhappy unsurprises.  According to Rao, this is
the implied fate of systems that are tied inextricably to a fixed
vision, from which any deviation constitues a mistake.  This condition
stands at a sharp contrast with the ``second-order cybernetics''
introduced by \citeA{von2003cybernetics}, which envisions systems that
are able to specify their own purpose, and adapt it with respect to a
wider environment.  It also contrasts with Taleb's
\citeyearpar{taleb2012antifragile} notion of ``antifragility'' in
which disturbances within a certain range strengthen the system.
\citeA{minsky1967programming} argues that any sufficiently complex
computational system is bound to make decisions that its creators
could not foresee, and may not fully understand.  Demonstrably
gracefully behaviour in response to unexpected circumstances, and a
preference for ``happy'' as opposed to ``unhappy'' outcomes may be
prerequisites for the development of autonomous systems that are
worthy of our trust.  While not the same as ``Serendipity as a
Service'', such systems should at least be able to recognise
serendipity when it happens.

Less controversial than ``programmed serendipity'', but no less worthy
of study, is serendipity that arises in the course of user
interaction.  Indeed, social media already offers something
approaching ``Serendipity as a Service''.  The user logs in hoping,
but with no guarantee, that they will find something interesting,
charming, or entertaining, and ultimately relevant to whatever is
going on in their life at the moment.  However, it should not be
assumed that a system that can accommodate user interaction can lead
to serendipity; take for example the use of a calculator, where the
potential for serendipity through user interaction is minimal.  The
frameworks introduced in this paper are broad enough to be used in the
design and evaluation of sociotechnical systems, and we will touch on
some examples, however we focus on modelling serendipity in a
computational context.

Section \ref{sec:literature-review} surveys the broad literature on
serendipity including the etymology of the term itself, and historical
examples that we will use to scaffold our model.  In Section
\ref{sec:our-model} we present our own definition of serendipity,
which synthesises the understanding gained from these historical
examples, and prepares the way for evaluation of serendipity in
computational systems.  Section \ref{sec:computational-serendipity}
examines three such case studies.  Section \ref{sec:discussion}
examines prior applications of the concept of serendipity in
computing, and offers recommendations for researchers working in the
computational modelling of serendipity and related areas such as
computational creativity.  It also describes our own plans for future
work.  Section \ref{sec:conclusion} reviews the contributions of this
paper towards computational modelling and evaluation of serendipity.


