\subsection{Challenges for future research} \label{sec:recommendations}

Viewing the concepts in Section \ref{sec:by-example} through the
practice scenarios we have discussed, we can describe the following
challenges for research in computational serendipity.

\begin{itemize}
\item \textbf{Autonomy}: Our thought experiment in Section
  \ref{sec:ww} develops a design illustrating the relationship between
  creativity at the level of artefacts (e.g.~new poems) and creativity
  at the level of \emph{problem specification} (learning new poetic
  concepts).  The search for connections that make raw data into
  ``strategic data'' is an appropriate theme for research in
  computational intelligence and machine learning to grapple with.  In
  the standard cybernetic model, we control computers, and we also
  control the computer's operating context.  There is little room for
  serendipity if there is nothing outside of our direct control.  In
  contrast with the mainstream model, von Foerster
  \citeyear[p. 286]{von2003cybernetics} advocated a \emph{second-order
    cybernetics} in which ``the observer who enters the system shall
  be allowed to stipulate his own purpose.''  \emph{A primary
    challenge to the serendipitous operation of computers is
    developing computational agents that specify their own problems.}
\end{itemize}

\begin{itemize}
\item \textbf{Learning}: The Writers Workshop described in Section
  \ref{sec:ww} is fundamentally an example of a design for a system
  that can \emph{learn from experience}.  The Workshop model
  ``personifies'' the wider world in the form of one or several
  critics.  It is clearly also possible for a lone creative agent to
  take its own critical approach in relationship to the world at
  large, using an experimental approach to generate feedback, and then
  looking for models to fit this feedback.   We are led to consider 
  computational agents that operate in our world rather
  than a circumscribed microdomain, and that are curious about this
  world.  \emph{A second challenge is for computational agents to
    learn more and more about the world we live in.}
\end{itemize}

\begin{itemize}
\item \textbf{Sociality}: As Campbell \citeyear{campbell2005serendipity} writes:
  ``serendipity presupposes a smart mind.''  We may be aided in our
  pursuit by recalling Turing's proposal that computers should ``be
  able to converse with each other to sharpen their wits''
  \cite{turing-intelligent}.  Other fields, including computer Chess,
  Go, and argumentation have achieved this, and to good effect.
  Deleuze \citeyear[p. 26]{deleuze1994difference} wrote: ``We learn
  nothing from those who say: `Do as I do'. Our only teachers are
  those who tell us to `do with me'[.]''  Turing recognised that
  computers would have to be coached in the direction of social
  learning, but that once they attain that standard they will learn
  much more quickly.  \emph{A third challenge is for computational
    agents to interact in a recognisably social way with us and with
    each other, resulting in emergent effects.}
\end{itemize}

\begin{itemize}
\item \textbf{Embedded evaluation}:
  \citeA{stakeholder-groups-bookchapter} outlined a general programme
  for computational creativity, and examined perceptions of creativity
  in computational systems found among members of the general public,
  Computational Creativity researchers, and creative communities --
  understood as human communities.  We should now add a fourth
  important ``stakeholder'' group in computational creativity
  research: computer systems themselves.  Creativity may look very
  different to this fourth stakeholder group than it looks to us.  We
  should help computers evaluate their own results and creative
  process.  \emph{A fourth challenge is for computational agents to
    evaluate their own creative process and products.}
\end{itemize}

It is our responsibility as system designers to teach them how to make
evaluations in way that is both reasonable and ethical.  This is
exemplified by the preference for a ``non-zero sum'' criterion for
value suggested in our discussion of the dimensions of serendipity in
Section \ref{sec:by-example}.

A quick survey of word occurrences from a recent special issue of
\emph{Cognitive Computation} shows that related themes are broadly
active in the research community.\footnote{Articles converted to text
  via {\tt pdftotext -layout}, individual counts found via {\tt tr
    \textquotesingle~\textquotesingle~\textquotesingle\textbackslash
    n\textquotesingle~< file.txt | grep -c "stem*"}, and total word counts
  via {\tt wc -w}.  The corresponding counts for the \emph{current}
  paper are 7, \emph{28}, \emph{16}, \emph{47} and 12.0K.}  Here
\emph{italics} indicates that the word stem accounted for .1\% of the
article or more; added \textbf{\emph{bold}} indicates that it
accounted for 1\% or more.

\medskip

\input{cog-comp-table}

\bigskip

Paper 4, Rob Saunder's \citeyear{saunders2012towards} ``Towards
Autonomous Creative Systems: A Computational Approach'' was the only
contributed paper to emphasise all four of our themes according to the
metric above.  Saunders asks: ``What would it mean to produce an
autonomous creative system? How might we approach this task? And, how
would we know if we had succeeded?''  He argues for an approach ``that
models personal motivations, social interactions and the evolution of
domains.''  Paper 10, d'Inverno and Luck's \citeyear{d2012creativity}
``Creativity Through Autonomy and Interaction'', also contains a
theoretical engagement with these themes, presents a formalism for
multi-agent systems that could usefully be adapted to model
serendipitous encounters.  Both papers are particularly concerned with
\emph{motivation}, a theme that relates to our notion of a prepared
mind and to the topic of embedded evaluation.

We believe that our clarifications to the multifaceted concept of
serendipity will help encourage future computer-aided (and
computer-driven) investigations of the above themes and their
interrelationships.  Our extension of SPECS to cover serendipity will
be useful for evaluating progress.  We discuss some of our related
research plans below.
